[Music]
hello and welcome to topcast for a
little bit of cross-promotion something
a little bit different today
i did an interview earlier this year in
with chris from do explain that other
podcast that concentrates on all things
optimistic and progress
and everything that has been inspired by
the beginning of infinity and the fabric
of reality
chris does an excellent interview series
with a whole bunch of people
and he asked if i'd be interested in
promoting his podcast
on my podcast and he gave me the sob
story about how he's from sweden and
basically he's living under a marxist
nightmare where the sun barely rises for
months of the year
and they have to fight off polar bears
with flaming sticks in the darkness like
something out of game of thrones
so i felt sorry for him and there is a
long
history of australians coming to the
rescue of europeans and so
i thought yes i can be part of that
lineage of people
going into the northern hemisphere and
helping out as far as i'm able to
but i do hope that if you listen to this
episode you will be inspired to go
and subscribe to do explain chris's
excellent podcast there
i am very happy to collaborate with
chris on this as you'll hear
he's a great interviewer even if as is
fairly obvious he is working in his
fourth language
we talk about epistemology and physics
and well
all the great hits so to speak this is
the first part of our chat and if you'd
like to hear chris's other interviews
or just google do explain the podcast
i'll put some links in the description
he's interviewed david deutsch
about his work luly tanner about meme
theory and
learning charlie younghaan who is a
mutual friend of ours about
optimism charlie has one of the only
impressions
i've heard of myself that's out there so
his episodes with chris are definitely
worth listening to if only for that
but actually charlie and chris together
have great chemistry and
really explore lots of the beginning of
infinity themes in a fun way
michael golding a psychiatrist is there
with a great interview about
clinical practice and how he has
incorporated some of the explicit
teachings from the worldview in let's
say the beginning of infinity
into helping people on a personal level
sarah fitzgerald has recently spoken
with chris about
a philosophy of how to help children
flourish which is called
tcs taking children seriously and chris
is not shy of having people
on his podcast that come from a
completely different perspective as well
or at least a
slightly different perspective for
example his recent interview with
jake authwing is in two parts and is
about a different way of looking at
epistemology
if you're not fully on board with the
porpyrian worldview
matt goodman has argued against free
will on chris's podcast
and sam kuipers has argued for it i've
got a lot of favorite episodes on
chris's excellent podcast so if you're
tired of waiting for the next
tock cast there's no better way of
tuning in do we still say that
subscribing
downloading streaming i sound terribly
old don't i listening to some
more episodes of do explain in the
meantime
chris is one of the few people actually
who does reliably make me feel
old by calling me uncle brett something
that he the two
only my own nieces have done that's okay
strangely chris has a very australian
sense of humor
so far as i can tell which is basically
about forming social bonds
through meeting the challenge of finding
a more or less witty way to remind the
other person
that they're a completely fallible human
being well that's a polite way to put it
whatever the case here in this
conversation that i'm about to have
with chris and you're about to hear if
you haven't already heard it
we talk about aspects of physics like
quantum theory parts of epistemology
the significance of people free will
versus determinism
and understanding universality part of
this conversation it seems to me
actually did inspire me to go on to make
a few of my standalone episodes like
the nexus and understanding universality
anyways
there is a genuine wealth of information
there at the do explain podcasts and i
can't recommend
it highly enough without further ado
here is my interview with chris on do
explain
both of us are great adherents of the
bostrom worldview
we believe it we've calculated it
there's a very
small probability that we're going to
survive the next century and unless we
start taking seriously
all the ways in which everything from
agi to climate change is just going to
wipe out our species
i think that these optimus and the
deutsche and style of thinking
are going to be one of the causes of our
demise i agree with all of that but not
only that
through direct observation one can
objectively
see the truth manifest and i think the
oh [__] are we recording
all right so today i'm here with none
other
than the great brett hall and uh
i'm actually gonna let brett introduce
himself this time so brad can you tell
us
a little bit about who you are and why
you're here yeah so i've been asked to
introduce myself a few times over the
last few months on different forums
and i've managed to botch the attempt
every single time so
i've tried to figure out how to
introduce myself to you
and perhaps the best way i can do it is
in a way that's kind of popular which is
kind of appropriate i suppose
so rather than tell you who i am or what
the truth of my background is i'll tell
you what i'm not
so i sort of i started studying science
but never actually became a scientist so
i'm not a scientist i wanted to become
an astronomer as a little kid
went off studied a fair bit of astronomy
but i'm not an astronomer i never became
an astronomer
i took a degree in philosophy studied a
lot of philosophy but i'm not a
philosopher either
i was a security guard while i was at
university but i'm not a security guard
anymore either
i was a teacher for a while i'm no
longer a teacher these are all the
things i'm not i think the thing that
is closest to the way i describe what i
do now
is a job i did hold at university i held
this position called
science communicator which sounds all
very impressive but i wouldn't even call
myself a science communicator now
because
looking at the community of science
communicators now they're a little
off-putting
in terms of their authoritarian
tendencies you know these people who say
believe the evidence and uh
follow the science as if science is some
sort of authoritarian leader that we all
need to get behind so
i wouldn't even call myself a science
communicator now so the best i can say
about myself i think is
i'm just a podcaster um
i mean i like that i've never had
someone explain
their own situation and describe
themselves by yeah falsifying
claims that they are something that
that's really cool man and uh
you have become for better or worse the
face
of deutsche and critical rationalism and
i'm joking of course because you were
yeah no no man i mean i'm uh i used to
i usually refer to you as the alan watts
of our day or the alan watts of critical
rationalism
are you suggesting i'm gonna die of
alcoholism before my time
that is exactly what i mean by that no
it's um
it's because i think you're a great
communicator of these ideas you're
clearly very passionate about them
which i think is one of the most
important things but
i don't know how you came to these ideas
in the first place and what your
intellectual backstory was there and i'm
sure you've talked about it somewhere
but i would love if you could
recapitulate that uh history for our
listeners a little bit and we can take
it from there
yeah sure so as i kind of indicated in
my introduction to myself
as a kid i really wanted to be an
astronomer that's all i wanted to do i
looked up at the stars my parents bought
me
books about the universe and books about
space and so i knew
that i wanted to go off to university
and study astronomy
but when i was at school i didn't
realize that studying astronomy entailed
taking on
an entire physics degree and so towards
the end of my high schooling i started
to pick up popular science books and in
particular
paul davies professor paul davies wrote
a large number
of popular science books chief among
them was a book called the mind of god
which ended up winning him the templeton
prize which is quite a
lucrative science prize well it's at the
intersection of science and theology
and in reading this book i really became
interested in
sort of not only astronomy but broader
issues around
physics mathematics philosophy and so
when i did finally get to university
and commenced studying physics i was
disappointed in a sense because
certainly when i got to
the quantum physics side of things which
paul davies made sound
really really interesting i found just
completely and utterly confusing i
didn't understand what was going on
the way in which the lectures were
presented were very dry very
mathematical
and when it came to trying to understand
what was going on in the experiments
we were always sort of pushed aside with
responses like well no one understands
this
and the richard feynman had of you know
if you think you understand quantum zero
you don't understand quantum theory and
so i became
somewhat disillusioned with the whole
quantum physics thing
and went into studying a little bit more
mathematics a little bit more philosophy
other areas of physics so we went back
to astronomy kind of thing
and at the time as i sort of said
earlier
i was a security guard at a very large
shopping center
and the shopping center had like three
or four bookshops back when there were
book shops around the place at amazon i
didn't
take over the selling of books and i
would wander into these bookshops and
immediately make a b-line for the
popular science section to see what new
books had come out
i'd read everything that paul davies had
put out and one day here was this book
called the fabric of reality
by david deutsch and at the time i
didn't realize i had encountered
the name david deutch before in the work
of paul davies
but there was nothing really notable
about the mentions of david deutsch in
the mind of god or in any of paul davies
other books
but on the back of the fabric of reality
and i've told this story a few times was
a
recommendation by paul davies saying
something along the lines of
i haven't been so inspired since i read
godel escher and bark
which is very high praise you know that
douglas hofstadter book is regarded as
being
one of the greatest all-time popular
science books
and so for paul davies to compare the
work of david deutsch to someone like
douglas hofstadter i thought well i've
got to get this book i've got to get
this fabric of reality books i
immediately bought it took it home
and in chapter one it was straight away
obvious to me that he was a guy speaking
my language
he said something along the lines very
early on there i think it's like page
one or page two of chapter one
that it was thought by the ancients that
they could eventually
come to understand everything that could
be understood but now in the modern era
the claim seems to be there's no way a
single person can understand
everything that could be understood
after all science just keeps to
seems to keep fragmenting itself into
ever more specialized disciplines so
how could anyone come to know everything
that could be known
but david says there in at the beginning
of the fabric of reality
well it's not about trying to know every
single fact that is known
what it's about is trying to come to a
deep understanding of
our most fundamental theories which from
which
you end up being able to derive
understandings of everything else that
is understood
and so far from having to know lots more
you only need to know these few
fundamental principles laws
theories explanations and then from that
you can get a good understanding of the
entirety of reality
but that wasn't the best part i thought
well that's that's a really impressive
way to begin
a popular science book it wasn't until i
got to chapter two
chapter two is called shadows that well
at the time i was studying again
physics degree i was struggling through
trying to understand quantum physics
just
feeling disillusioned with the whole
thing not getting it being told no one
gets it no matter which popular science
book i
hear the two had gone to was i getting a
coherent story about what's going on in
these experiments
but in that book in in in that chapter
shadows he lays out the classic
two-slit experiment and it was then that
i had this sensation that i think i'd
only had
once before uh which was probably about
12 months prior i'd been reading
descartes meditations
a fantastic five meditations of
decoration at six i can't remember
anyway it's a wonderful feeling of
vertigo and in reading descartes
descartes talks about how he's sitting
there by the fire
and he's wondering if he's dreaming if
he's awake and then he has this method
of doubt and he thinks well what can i
be certain of
and he ends up realizing that the only
thing of which he descarte could be
certain
is the fact that when he thinks when he
is doubting when he's going through this
process of doubt
that something is doubting therefore
something exists and that something is
him and
when i read that i thought wow that's
that's astonishing that was a real sense
of vertigo like everything fell out from
beneath me and i had a new way of
looking at the world
yeah i'm getting goosebumps when you
describe it yeah and and
and that sensation was was a hundred
fold when i read
the description of how this experiment
worked this twin slit experiment which
i'd read about
countless times before but when david
deutsch explained it in shadows
suddenly the mind just expanded it was
it was phenomenal it was like i can
imagine that people who
you know drop acid have this kind of
sensation but i didn't need to drop acid
i was just reading this book
and suddenly my mind expanded from
the experiment and from the page that i
was reading into
infinite kind of realities to this
multiplicity of universes
because i suddenly understood that this
was the only way in which to understand
what was going on in this experiment
and so that immediately made me think
well this guy
knows what he's talking about this guy's
not trying to pull the wool over my eyes
he's just trying to lay out
as clearly as possible as astounding as
it sounds
what the actual explanation of this
experiment is and what quantum theory is
all about and suddenly from there on
i got quantum theory you know i didn't
become a quantum physicist i did i
didn't pursue the
the details or anything like that but i
felt as though now i get it
and i just didn't understand i was kind
of angry with the lecturers at
university and everyone else like why
won't you tell
why won't you teach us this this is this
is the way to go and i i got to meet
paul davies sometime
time later i was very lucky enough he he
moved to australia and he was there in
australian australian university and he
came to sydney and uh
a long story short i i did talk to him
about this i said you know do you
endorse the multiverse explanation
and again he just sort of he kind of
fobbed me off he was a lovely man you
know very polite and you know willing to
talk but
he he basically said what's the effect i
don't have time to explain all the ways
in which that's wrong
and in reading his his uh explanation as
to why he thought that the multiverse
wasn't correct well he relied on occam's
razor he was basically saying well
in order to explain the one universe we
have we have to postulate an infinite
number of universes and he didn't like
it yeah a lot of cool stuff in there
brad first of all
i think the um shut up and calculate
interpretation as it's called
of quantum theory or the whole yeah it
cannot be understood it's a very
shitty way to frame the problem of
understanding it because i mean
you're not even going to try and uh yeah
we might get into that later
why so many people doubt that we
actually do have a
good understanding of quantum theory
also i i can really relate
to that phenomenology
of yeah you're trying to grapple with a
problem and it's
some inexplicit feeling kind of similar
in a way i think
to when you have something in your mind
you you want to say something it's on
your tongue but you can't really find it
and you're looking for it and then all
of a sudden it clicks and you find that
word
or you you remember what you wanted to
say or in this case
something clicks and you saw the problem
that you previously hadn't been able to
solve and it's just like you say it's
this
expansive almost high feeling
of uh joy and excitement and curiosity
and uh
yeah it's really cool feeling yeah and
it's just like the way that
david begins the beginning of infinity
he begins with the quote from john
archibald wheeler where
he says behind it all is surely an idea
so simple so beautiful that when we
grasp it
in a decade a century or millennium we
will all say to each other
how could it have been otherwise and
whether or not that applies to
a particular physics theory of
everything so-called theory of
everything
whether it applies to anything like the
situation i just described it's like
you're struggling to try and understand
this thing you're not getting
satisfactory answers and then when you
do get a satisfactory answer
it can be so simple but the simple idea
the joy of finding that simple idea can
be just
so thrilling that it makes you it it
causes some kind of
addiction towards that style of writing
that style of
presentation and that way of
understanding the world which i think is
why
so many of us have been drawn together
like into this uh
like this gravitational pull where we've
all come together trying to appreciate
these ideas
more specifically for that reason
because they're simple
but under appreciated we want other
people to be able to appreciate these
ideas
because we know how thrilling it is how
thrilling it is to understand
these simple ideas i say simple but
they're also subtle you know
there's a there's a mind shift one has
to go through
in order to really change perspective
which could be the hardest thing to do
because you are brought up of course in
an environment in an educational
environment in a culture which is
in many ways antithetical or
antagonistic towards
some of these concepts that we're going
to talk about throughout this
conversation
yeah i know for sure and uh i think an
accusation that has been leveled
against us both the idea that this
podcast or your stuff it's all just
masturbating on the content of david
deutsch and just saying whatever he
says and i think that's a fundamental
misunderstanding of what these ideas are
and what they
grant you they they give you first of
all a fundamental understanding
of how far we've come so far
but more essentially than that i think
it gives you an understanding of
how do you evaluate explanations
how do you take in information and
evaluate whether it's
useful and potentially true or whether
it's complete [__] and that then
allows you
not to have the answers to every
potential question
already and and falling back on some
authority there where we just say oh
no but it's in this book beginning of
infinity like it's the bible
and so that has to be the case it gives
you new lenses through which
you can view the world and then evaluate
things for yourself the whole central
idea
at least to me is we all have the same
potential
as people and there are no authorities
you have to think for yourself and
this is the way to evaluate things and
it also includes the fact
that these theories can be wrong as well
we've talked about fallibilism a lot
but the idea that yeah there's no claim
you can make that
is absolute or certain and it doesn't
need to be so you have to question
the ideas themselves and that's what
makes them
fundamentally different from something
like religion or something that just
tells you to accept it with blind faith
and then you can't argue against it
anymore or test it anymore we test it
all the time
precisely i couldn't agree with that
more you you've expressed it
very very well and i i began my own uh
series my own modest attempt
to understand the the worldview
presented in the beginning of infinity
with an episode where i'm sort of
halting and i'm uncertain but but i'm
basically saying
i'm thinking out loud i'm trying to
understand these ideas myself and the
only way to learn as we both know
is via this critical method you have to
conjecture the idea yourself
criticize it in your own mind and if it
survives those criticisms then you
accept it as part of
the repertoire of ideas that you have
moving forward now this is completely
unlike
anything in religion of course in
religion you cleave to the words very
closely and you can't change the text
but what i'm trying to do and what
you're trying to do and various other
people in the community are trying to do
is not cleave to the text what we're
trying to do is to explain these ideas
in every new different
ways using different words modifying the
ideas
hither and theatre as required so that
all of us can try and
understand what is being said here
david's not trying to say
this is the only way that you can think
what he's trying to say what he's trying
to put out there is
a particular series of theories uh
approaches to knowledge
approaches to to physics to science more
broadly to reason more broadly
and giving people some initial tools
to then go into the world and to solve
their own problems but
to make progress you know uh in their
own life their own community and
and and hopefully as a civilization as
well that the book has
all those different levels which is
another way in which it's kind of unique
that it can be both i certainly wouldn't
demean it by saying you know
the work of david deutsch is about
self-help but it can it can have
elements there
that are very much going to be
personally helpful in your
individual life as well as hopefully
helpful on a civilizational level where
governments can actually take
some of this stuff on board and have
more optimistic policies more
more human or humanistic policies yeah
no
so the self-help point i know david
himself is very
careful not to say that he's giving any
self-help advice
but as you say it has implications vast
implications even
just understanding a few simple things
like
there's nothing that your mind can
understand that mine can't
if i'm interested to learn it there's no
fundamental difference between
you and me such as the idea of iq being
hardware that limits me but not you and
stuff like that
and then also yeah that there are no
authorities and
the most freeing thing i can imagine
psychologically
is truly thinking for yourself to be
able to
actually evaluate claims and
explanations and information
by yourself i think it's the the biggest
gift you can give to someone to to trust
their own thinking like that
yeah and if i can take it back um rather
self-centeredly to my
own story with respect to that i kind of
um
as i say struggling to understand the
content of quantum theory lectures that
i was going to in like second and third
year university
and not wanting to take anyone's word
for it i was just very critical the
entire time the fact that i didn't
understand it on the one hand i thought
well maybe you're mentally just not up
to it but that was a small portion of
the
explanation i gave myself as to why i
couldn't understand this stuff
the better explanation was either no one
understands this or the people that i'd
been speaking to
didn't understand this and so i had this
real desire
to think for myself think through this
stuff for myself
and so even when someone with the
reputation of richard feynman is saying
if you think you understand quantum zero
you don't understand quantum theory
i very quickly and easily kind of
dismissed that and thought well
that's a clever little quip but i want
to understand this stuff because i
thought
i i thought i was reasonably clever
because i you know had
maybe i'll just explain to the audience
for anyone who might be unfamiliar with
this thing called
young's twin slit experiment young's
twin slit experiment is the classic
quantum
physics demonstration that shows that
something weird is going on in quantum
theory now
what you can do the prosaic familia
young's twin set experiment named after
thomas young back in the
i'll make a mistake here but sometime in
the 1800s he did the classic experiment
where he shone a light
at two slits cut into a piece of board
and then through those two slits went
the beam of light which was then
projected onto another screen and you
get this classic thing called the
interference pattern
and if you understand some physics and
you understand some
ways in which waves interact water waves
sound waves then you can explain what's
going on in that interference experiment
you can explain it as
well light's a wave because what happens
is you get
areas of dark and light banding
and the dark bands are where you've got
destructive interference where a
effectively a trough meets a crest and
they cancel each other out so you get no
light in that area in other places you
get bright
areas and those are places where two
crests meet and so they they reinforce
one another you get this bright area so
it seems like according to thomas
young's old experiment
that therefore light's a wave so what a
wonderful solution to this whole problem
about what the nature of light was
before tom was young
we had isaac newton saying well it's
corpuscular it's made out of particles
but
this seemed to falsify that now the
problem is you get into the 1900s and
people start doing experiments where
they can show that light is in fact a
particle like it can do things like you
can shine a light at certain kinds of
metal
and it will knock electrons out of their
orbits now if
something can knock an electron out of
its orbit and it's being held in that
orbit by the electrostatic force you
know you've got the positive nucleus and
you've got the negative electrons
they've effectively attracted one to
another
the only thing that's going to knock
that electron out of its orbit is
something with momentum
and so therefore this led people over
time
along with some other experiments to
conclude or at least to explain light
as particles packets of light photons we
call them and so we know
that light is not a wave it's particles
because we can do these experiments so
then it becomes a huge mystery
because if you fire photons one at a
time at this apparatus
at this young's twin slit apparatus you
know you fire one photon you wait a
second find another photon wait a second
you still get this interference
phenomenon going on you still end up
with these bright and dark bands over
time accumulating
and if that's not weird enough you can
do this with electrons things that you
know must be particles they're not waves
or indeed entire atoms will do the same
thing you'll get an interference
pattern and so this becomes a mystery
and so the classic way that people try
and explain or explain away i would say
what's going on here is something called
wave particle duality
where you say that a particle is a
particle sometimes and a wave other
times
but this for me violates logic you know
violates the law of the occluded middle
which basically says
i think x cannot both be and not be
simultaneously either i'm here doing a
podcast with you
or i'm not it's one or the other i can't
be both of those things simultaneously
and so in trying to understand this
interference
phenomena this twin slit experiment
every explanation that is given
aside from the one that i'm going to
explain to you
is either going to be some violation of
logic and some by the way some
physicists
just go the whole hog and they say well
you know logic has to bow down to
quantum theory we need a new logic we
need quantum logic which is
more fundamental than basic logic so in
that case you can violate the law of the
excluded middle of course
i'm not happy with that i don't like
that i think that is unreasonable that
just
we cannot have random violations of
logic
by what's going on in science it's not
the way to understand
reality reality must make sense and that
doesn't make sense
isn't there sorry to interject but isn't
there already a
version of that prayer consistent logic
or something like that that can
deal with contradictions yes but
i don't think that logic applies to the
real world we can invent mathematical
systems
that are more resembling art you know
abstract art need not
represent anything that's going on in
the real world we can have these kind of
abstract mathematical
tools that are fun to play with but
might have no bearing actually on what's
going on in the real world so sure you
can have
all kinds of logic you can have these
quantum logics you can take away
the insistence that the law of the
excluded middle must obtain in the real
world
but just because you can do that doesn't
mean that it's accurate to or accurate
to apply it to
real life no that's a cool explanation
yeah i
actually i just wanted to throw that in
there it's just a little smarter than i
am
because i don't know anything about it
but sorry man continue
please um and so the other way of going
like apart from let's just accept the
fact that the
world makes no sense essentially and
that the world doesn't have to obey
simple logic let's instead go down the
road of
well if you observe the system
then it changes the experiment but if
you don't observe the system then the
experiment proceeds as normal
and this is the idea sometimes referred
to as the copenhagen interpretation
which is where you have some role
for consciousness in fundamental physics
that there is
there's some important way in which the
observer is actually affecting the
outcome of the experiment
now i didn't like this either this
sounds too spooky this sounded weird but
some people are willing to go down that
road and
and much effort in the 1900s was
expended by
all sorts of top physicists and trying
to figure out why it is that if you
observe something
uh then you get one outcome and if you
don't observe it you get a different
outcome
and and this is one of the one of the
ways in which uh
people like david deutsch and hugh
everett who came up with the
many worlds interpretation we don't call
it interpretation anymore we just say
we're literally explaining what's going
on with the equations of quantum theory
and with what's going on with our
observations of the experiments we just
say and as david points out in the
fabric of reality
that it has nothing to do with the
observer the observer is just
part of reality as well they're not
having any special effect
there's no weird force coming out of
your brain heading towards the photons
and
changing the path of the photons what we
say is that
when you fire a single photon at the
apparatus
the single photon goes through one of
those slits you can observe it going
through one of those slits
now if you cover up the other slit what
happens is the interference pattern
disappears
and instead the one slit will allow a
photon to go through or not go through
it maybe it won't hit the slip but if it
goes through it'll continue to go
through that slit and just end up at
one spot behind where the slit is on the
screen
and if you reopen the other slit the
second slit then suddenly the
interference
pattern comes back which means there's
something coming
through that second slit that you do not
observe that you cannot observe
and our conclusion is well that thing
that's coming through
it's part of our universe in a sense
it's part of our reality
but we're prohibited from measuring it
in any way we're prohibited from
detecting it other than through this
interference phenomena
what's happening is something's coming
through that slit
that is able to crash into literally
crash into the
photon that we do observe and push it
aside push it into a different place
push it into
such a place that you get over time this
interference effect building up
and that thing that's coming through
that other slit
it's a photon it's just a photon that we
can't detect
now technically speaking what we say is
well it's a photon in a different
universe because if you were to do this
experiment with
any other particle then that particle
like an electron
is going to be accompanied by electrons
that you cannot observe
and if you do the experiment with atoms
it's going to be
accompanied by atoms you cannot observe
and this means that
for every single particle there are
other versions of that particle
that you cannot observe now at this
point in the explanation people say oh
you're postulating entities that you
cannot possibly observe
well we can in a sense know that they're
there because they're having an effect
on the things that we do observe
it's rather like uh in my own
field astronomy if we look at very
distant stars
we can't necessarily directly observe
planets going around those stars we can
see the stars move and so we know the
planets must be there by
by a a chain of logic and explanation
we can postulate the existence of things
we cannot see in astronomy
and as david as it pains to point out in
in various places ted talks and in his
books
this in fact is just so common
throughout science that the history of
science is replete
with making claims about things which in
principle
we can't observe or for all practical
purposes we'll never be able to observe
the big bang is one of my favorite
examples the other one is you know the
the core of a star where fusion
reactions are going on we can't get
there to observe these things
and in the same way when it comes to
this double slit experiment all we're
saying is
the universe is a bit bigger than what
we thought stupendously bigger than what
we thought but this is again the history
of science whenever we make
uh discoveries we find out oh the
universe is even bigger than what we
thought before and this is just another
case of that
and this is why uh you know i guess
there's two styles of people you know i
read
um the fabric of reality and i went okay
that makes sense you know i had the
sense of vertigo it was wonderful joyful
experience but it wasn't like i was
just balking at the notion and going
this can't possibly be the case but
there is
a person who is going to book at it and
go this can't possibly be the case but
the thing is
about quantum theory that there has to
be some explanation
and of all the explanations on offer
they're all
they all make you sound a little bit
crazy but there's only one that makes
literal sense and and this is the one
that makes literal sense
and the shut up and calculate of course
explanation is no explanation at all you
mentioned that it's like
this is just denying that there's
anything that can be said
at all and in the absence of
explanations that everyone might just
accept on the face of it
we defer to the best explanation and the
best explanation
is the explanation that is the
multiverse
right nice mate that's uh
that's a great introduction to the topic
of quantum theory here and
firstly i think that this kind of
showcases nicely
how faulty epistemology is a real big
problem
so namely empiricism in this case that
we can observe
and that what we observe is the most
important thing
rather than what we observe is just
theoretical interpretation our brain is
making
of whatever is actually out there and
science is about what's actually there
now what we can observe so that's uh
that's a good point
and then full disclosure of the four
strands
that david talks about in fabric of
reality
quantum theory is if i'm not mistaken he
says it's the most
important of the four strands and
to me who's not into physics at all in
general
i know very little about it it's the my
least favorite
part and i always kind of try to go into
those
chapters in david's books and i feel
like i should understand them
but i always end up
giving up someone and i've never really
grasped
the central tenets of quantum theory i
think
so with that in mind with the fact that
i don't have much
prior knowledge or background knowledge
about physics
you've already explained there how
we have falsified some of the other
theories that are going around there
and you've shown what experiments give
us corroborating evidence or some of
them
for the multiverse as the best
explanation but
if it's possible i would love if you
could
outline essentially quantum theories for
dummies how would you
explain the theory and what it tells us
about the universe
without invoking too many technical
terms perhaps if possible
so this is where um i i should before i
commence that explanation
apologize to you for taking so long
to come on to this wonderful podcast
you've had such high quality high
caliber guests
and each time i was too busy to come on
you invite me on i'd say oh yeah sure
i'll be on and then you know weeks would
go by and i'd have to cancel for this or
that other reason
you'd then have a wonderful guest on who
when i listened
i would think to myself wow that's
exactly what i was thinking only said
much more eloquently much better and so
as i go into this explanation about
quantum theory
i get a little self-conscious and i
think to myself well you've already had
guests
more qualified than me more
knowledgeable than me about this so i
i get concerned about butchering um
things like quantum theory and
in fact i could probably say that about
just about any topic that we bring up
you will have already had
some guests on who can probably do a
better job than i can at this but
nevertheless
let's try let's try and go through yeah
let's [__] the humility there for a bit
i appreciate you saying all that but
let's go man all right you got this
um the way in which i like to understand
quantum theory is
fundamentally about the difference
between the discrete and the continuous
however in saying that i will say that
the
most modern understanding of quantum
theory is going to bring in
the continuous in a way that i'm about
to say it doesn't really operate
what i mean by that is we think about
any kind of matter
so let's think about gold is there a
smallest possible particle of gold now
if you're an
ancient greek philosopher you might very
well think to yourself well you can just
keep on dividing up a lump of gold
add infinitely you can just keep on
going forever and there's no smallest
possible particle of gold unless your
democritus who thinks the opposite who
thinks well there must be a smallest
possible particle and he called it the
atom you know the thing that cannot be
divided any further and so in the modern
era what we understand is of course that
there
is a smallest possible particle for
anything that you can think of
whether it's gold the gold atom whether
it's water the water molecule whether
it's electricity the electron
whether it's light as i explained
earlier the photon and so this idea of
quantum theory is that there is this
smallest possible particle this quanta
of whatever it is that you happen to be
interested in including energy which
happens to be
the photon and so so just a follow-up
question there so i understand
because it seems intuitively like
whatever
and here's where my complete ignorance
comes in but i'm curious
so it seems like any small constituent
that you can find
why couldn't you always say yeah but we
can split that too
and so on at infinitum but are you
saying that that might be possible
but then it's no longer yeah gold as in
your example then will become something
else
precisely take water i mean h2o yeah you
can divide the h2o molecule into any
high school
science teacher will be able to do that
for you with something called hoffmann
voltmeter
and you'll divide it into hydrogen and
oxygen but now you no longer have
water you have the constituents out of
which the water is made and so
repeat that argument for just about
anything that you're interested in you
know gold you cut the gold atom in half
you split the gold atom i think gold's
number
whatever it is 72 on the periodic table
you divide that in half you've got
something that's no longer gold
now then it gets into this interesting
question however
about when you take something like the
electron now the electron can you divide
the electron
into half well so far as we know our
best explanation
of what electrons are is we say they are
fundamental particles and as a
fundamental particle it is
indivisible now this is not to say that
sometime in the distant future whatever
replaces quantum theory
won't reveal that there is constituents
within the electron but so far here too
we haven't been able to divide the
electron into anything more simple
and so this is where the quantum theory
comes in that there is this
smallest possible bit of certain things
and so it seems to rule in favor of
the discrete over the continuous and so
we have but
just just as a side effect i don't know
if any of your previous guests might
have talked about this
quantum theory is in a sense
deeply at odds with our other great
fundamental theory
of physics which is general relativity
and general relativity is the theory of
space time and in in that conception the
way in which the mathematics is done
you need to do certain kinds of
derivatives integrals which rely upon
continuous variation of things and
long story short it seems as though
there is no
smallest possible unit of time or no
smallest possible
unit of space or space time you can just
keep on dividing that up
it's continuous and so on the one hand
we have general relativity saying
the fundamental nature of reality
according to it
is that things are continuous and on the
other hand
quantum theory is saying no things are
discrete and so how do you
how do you bring these together into a
coherent whole about what the
fundamental nature of reality is well at
the moment no one knows and so that's a
really interesting area of research and
we need to wait for the smart people at
the sam kuipers of the world
to come up with an answer as to how we
actually go forward
and figure out what comes next after
quantum theory after general relativity
however there is this twist in the tale
of then
trying to understand what continuous
things are within quantum theory
you mean seemingly continuous things or
because if quantum theory is true then
there aren't continuous things right or
did i misinterpret that
no you didn't but the modern spin i want
to put on to this
is as we say the way of understanding
what's going on in the experiments of
quantum theory and what's going on with
the formalism when i say formalism i
mean the mathematical equations that are
used to describe the evolution of
quantum
systems over time one of which is called
the schrodinger wave equation the
schrodinger wave equation is just this
way
of showing how all the possibilities
that exist
come together to affect the possibility
that you actually observe and so
on the multiverse account all these
possibilities really do exist
we just take it seriously the
schrodinger wave equation says that
they're there
the experiments reveal that those
possibilities are affecting the
possibility that we actually see so
on that basis um all the possibilities
really exist now the thing is
the schrodinger wave equation is a
continuous distribution of
for example there are many ways of using
the schrodinger wave equation
but it's a continuous distribution of
all the positions for example that an
electron might have
throughout the multiverse and so an
electron
in our universe is a discrete single
thing in our universe or is it
according to reading the multiverse
chapter in the beginning of infinity and
reading david's other work
on this we learned that in fact the
electron
as we observe it in the universe is
unavoidably
a multiversal object which means it has
fungible instances of itself in any
given place at a particular time
and what that means is that the electron
is not a single electron but is
uncountably infinite instances of
itself at a single place and time but
more than that
it also occupies all possible places
that the laws say that it can occupy
throughout the multiverse and in this
sense it's kind of continuous so if you
had a
god's eye view of the multiverse if you
could somehow get outside of the
multiverse and look at an electron
in all the different universes at the
same time you would see a continuous
stream of possibilities as to where that
electron is but in any one universe
it's a single discrete object this
concept of fungibility this this idea
that
electrons have counterparts in other
universes that are exactly identical
to themselves in exactly the same places
themselves but occupy different
universes
this is what is known as diversity
within fungibility because those
electrons those
uncountably infinite numbers of them all
exactly identical
except that some measure of them some
proportion of them
over time will end up going into
different places
and it's this sense in which although
all the electrons are exactly identical
at one moment in time after some amount
of time after some quantum interaction
what will happen is those electrons will
split up into a number of different
groups you know
in the simple case two different groups
of
uncountably infinite numbers of
electrons which prior to the splitting
or the diff we shouldn't say splitting
differentiation of these groups of
electrons prior to that they were
completely fungible
and then they go on to be non-fungible
they've differentiated and this
causes a differentiation of the
universes
there are some concepts here that i
usually get stuck
on when i read that chapter i actually
try to read the whole thing before this
interview
and i read most of it and i i think i
understand the basic premise of
yeah fungibility i like the example he
uses
one of the examples with uh yeah dollars
in
uh in a bank account they're all
essentially fungible
they are identical and there's not like
you can coherently say that the dollar
you used to buy something yesterday
is the same dollar you put in uh two
days before
i'm just curious though if we can
outline
what is the postulate that there is a
multiverse like
what does that entail for someone who
might not have read the book
only heard about the multiverse what is
the actual claim there
and maybe we can invoke some other fun
concepts like determinism
entanglement perhaps we've already
talked about interference and
wave particle duality but yeah so what
are we talking about when we
we say the multiverse brett yeah sure
there's this wonderful series on
youtube by this guy who does a top cast
who did a
five episode breakdown
yeah but it's so long for someone who
just wants
you know the three minute version three
okay
um so the multiverse is now
the original way of trying to explain
this was to say that the multiverse
literally is
a series of parallel universes uh
uncountably
infinitely large number of these
parallel universes all coexisting
obeying the same physical laws but over
time evolving in different ways now
since that idea was put out there i
think hugh everett kind of had that idea
but david deutsch has refined that idea
and various other people
um david wallace for example and others
have subtly different ways of explaining
what's going on with
the multiverse as we understand it way
of explaining what's happening in these
quantum theory experiments it's still
the case that there are
different universes that really do exist
but they're
quasi parallels so they do in fact
interact
parallel would imply that there's no
interaction between these universes but
then in fact they
they do interact and more than this and
this gets
this gets quite complicated and i'd
refer people to the work of david
wallace for this one
which is that unlike with when we think
about
the universe and the universe stretching
from here on earth to the other side of
the galaxy to the other side of
the universe you know billions upon
billions of light years away
that universe in the general relativity
sense we can imagine
just whole universes like that one
parked next to another park next to
another all just subtly different that
kind of thing but in fact
in the quantum theory understanding of
this you can have
universes that exist in a small region
of space within other universes so the
universes don't all necessarily have
the same size nor do they continue to
exist for the same amount of time
if we have one date we do have sort of
we have the nascent
beginnings of quantum computation and in
a quantum computer if a quantum computer
is working
what's going on inside that quantum
computer literally is
a separate universe it is disconnected
from our universe and it's only later
that it becomes a part of our universe
and so these universes can split apart
differentiate recombine come together
interfere again
and so they they they're not necessarily
what people might visualize
as universes in the classic cosmological
sense consisting of all these planets
they are that but they're
they're also more than that now the
really
kind of mind-bending part of this for me
is that
not only do the particles of course have
counterparts
in other universes so the electrons have
other counterparts in different
universes but you
you as a person have counterparts in the
other universe and
and this is where for me in the concept
of what a person is
all of the four strands that are in the
fabric of reality really do
come together the nexus of these four
really is in the nature of personhood
and that's one of the most mind-bending
things for me you know obviously we have
evolved we're part of natural selection
so natural selection has
led in a sense uh to people but the
theory of computation which is part of
this this world view as well well we
we are computers of a kind running a
special software of a kind and what is
that special software
it's a critical kind of software that
creates new explanations and so there
you've got
epistemology and then if we bring in
quantum theory what's quantum theory got
to do with this well quantum theory for
me is the most astonishing
part of this story about what we are as
people
because right now uh me brett and you
chris are sitting there on our chairs
and we have the experience that we're
just this one person in this one
universe but in fact
we are also uncountably infinitely many
fungible instances of ourself but we
just have this single coherent
conscious experience but every single
moment that goes by
we too are differentiating into
different copies going off and doing
different things of course we're only
ever conscious of one particular
instance one particular version of
ourselves
but there are other versions there are
versions where i've
probably many many more versions where
i've hung up the phone on you right now
because i'm just
talking to you but there's many others
in which you know i i've gone for a
coffee or you know in which um
you know i've continued the conversation
but i've said something slightly
different
and so this is the truth this is really
what's going on and so i think there's
an important
philosophical research project out there
for any people who are interested in
this is what is the nature of personhood
given what
this world view that we're trying to
understand given uh what i've just said
about the four strands how do these four
strands come together to allow us to
have a
deeper understanding of what a person is
i think that could be a really
interesting way of
of doing some philosophical research on
this question
yeah and i mean yeah i have to reinvoke
the idea of
intellectual vertigo that you talked
about before it's just um
yeah mind baffling to actually try to
get your head around the fact that i'm
branching into
trillion different universes all the
time
all right man so what you said there is
a really nice segue into what i want the
overarching theme of this podcast to be
about
namely a defense of people
and the significance of people so i
guess you could say of humanism
and um yeah like david has pointed out
before there's
somewhat uh of an intellectual trend
right now
where people who consider themselves
smart or call themselves
rationalists of different types seem to
yeah denigrate people in a variety of
different areas and ways
and i don't think that's right i don't
think it's morally
morally right and i don't think it's
factually correct the claims they're
making
so i want to go in to a few different
things there but before we do that
and before actually before we leave the
physics part i just want to ask you a
last part about that
which is i don't understand i know
david writes this but i still don't get
what he means
how can a fully deterministic multiverse
with fungible instances how can they
possibly
become different what is it that uh i
don't know if that's
possible to explain in just a minute or
two but i still don't understand how
full of deterministic universes that are
fungible and have the same history
all of a sudden can become different
what what determines that
i don't understand that okay so how does
a deterministic universe
differentiate itself into multiple
different instances is that
is that the question yeah so what is
that just uh
probabilistic or or because i know it's
often said that
everything that can happen will happen
somewhere in the multiverse
but i don't understand uh in david's
example the
jolt in the transporter occurs in one
universe but not in the other
but they were fungible and they followed
the same deterministic laws
i don't get what what determines that
so deterministic doesn't mean that only
one thing can possibly happen
deterministic
just means is going to follow the laws
of physics
and the laws of physics in this case
allow for
multiple possibilities given any
particular event
and so when for example we talk about
firing photons
at a double slit what we're actually
doing let's think about the process
by which photons are actually produced
in that experiment well usually it's uh
it could be so it could be something
like a candle okay a candle could be
burning
and the photons that are coming out of
that candle are going off in all
different directions
they're taking all the possible paths
that they could take now of course in
the candle situation you've got
many many photons simultaneously coming
out of that candle so let's alter the
experiment a little bit where we've got
a laser
and the process by which lasers produce
photons is
you're exciting this little crystal and
because the energy inside the atoms
inside the crystal is such that the
electrons move up and down their
orbitals
and this releases a photon but when the
photon comes out it could have gone
left or right let's say why could it go
left or up because that's what the laws
of physics say
the laws of physics permit mandate
that photons can take multiple different
paths and they do take multiple
different paths
in different universes and that's the
sense in which things are determined
and at the same time as them being
determined they're determined
to do different things in different
universes so
it's this word determined it has so many
philosophical hang-ups in people's minds
i think
it seems to indicate that either
there is just an unavoidably single path
that things follow
wrong because of quantum theory or that
there's no room for
anything emergent and real wrong because
of
reasons of emergence reasons of
creativity in particular
so this idea of determined everything
has to be determined okay there's no
getting around that the only alternative
to determinism
as many people have observed is things
are not determined in which case
everything's random
but we can see just by looking around
common sense and not everything is
random things are
proceeding according to some degree of
order
some degree of a path that is reasonably
predictable but not entirely predictable
you know we when i say reasonably
predictable we know where the moon is
going to be tomorrow night
but we don't know what people are going
to do next so there's this kind of
middle ground happily between
things that are predictable and things
that are inherently unpredictable and
it's in that interface between those two
things that we get
creativity and interest
yeah no i love that that really
clarifies it for me
so you mentioned it has philosophical
implications to think of determinism
this mistaken way and i i want to get
into the whole
free will uh reductionist debate later
and the
arguments uh for that that we can then
go into
but so so would this effectively mean
that
when someone argues we can't have free
will because
if we were to rewind the tape you would
always do the same thing in that
situation that wouldn't be
true in the sense well that's an
interesting
question philosophically and physically
now what precisely happens if we rewind
the tape so to speak
is that we don't know what the role of
consciousness is
in this picture of physical reality so i
don't know
if you rewound the tape what your
consciousness
would do as a matter of fact would it
follow the path that you did follow
or would it follow the path of these
other
otherwise fungible instances of yourself
and go off and do something else i don't
know i don't know what your experience
would be i think we need
a proper theory of consciousness a
proper theory of consciousness
that connects to quantum theory and
ultimately to whatever the
successor of quantum theory is then we
will be able to talk about this
rewinding of the tape and it just
playing out
in a fatalistic sense the same way each
time
even though things will be determined
things in general will be determined
and you will be determined to do one
thing rather than another whether or not
that means
the same thing all the time every single
time i i just don't know i think no one
knows at this point we're ignorant of
that fact and we just have to say
all we've got are uh reasonably good
explanations of things like
human behavior and this is where we
invoke things like
free will for example it's that the best
we have at the moment
because certainly pure determinism is
not explaining
the sense in which certain thinkers on
this topic invoke determinism isn't
explaining the creativity of human
beings that we see in the world
yeah okay so so to rephrase what i said
there
you can't with today's knowledge make
that claim
as our best explanation of physics and
determinism right
if you rewind the point like we we don't
know uh
at this point look if you rewound the
tape
the universe would evolve as it evolved
the multiverse would evolve
as it evolved but because we don't have
almost a clue as to what this
consciousness thing is
what you then become conscious of over
time i don't know if you would be
conscious of the same thing over time
i'm not saying that consciousness is
therefore outside of the laws of physics
far
from it i'm saying whatever the laws of
physics are that govern consciousness
might allow for the possibility that
your consciousness follows a different
path than what it did
before now your physical body the
physical instantiations of your body of
course are all doing
all the possible things they could have
done from the moment at which a choice
was made or a quantum event happens
that's crazy yeah yeah i'm [__]
myself in some most of us right now
yeah yeah yeah that's great i mean in my
book
determinism when people invoke that to
explain much of anything when it comes
to behavior to me it just sounds like
kind of a tautology like saying
everything that happens
happens yeah i couldn't agree more yeah
just a necessary truth
it's just to say yeah yeah exactly it
doesn't it's just a way to describe the
limitations of what could happen
but it doesn't give us any explanation
of why what happened actually happened
and i think that's the issue like if if
i the laws of physics
don't allow me to just with the
physiology i have now
jump off my balcony and fly away that's
a limitation
of the laws of physics but it doesn't
prove in any way that i don't have free
will like i think it's kind of similar
to that i don't know if that's an unfair
analogy but but that's how i think about
it yes
so let's jump to the idea of
universality and i'm
talking uh essentially about
computational universality
of our brains and then also the
explanatory universality
of our minds and these two are different
inseparable but in us they go together
in a way that make people truly powerful
and significant so i thought before
we go into all the arguments against
people
let's just see why we think that people
are so amazing
so uh yeah what what are these types of
universality and why can we say that we
know this is the case
okay so the first kind that you mention
is this computational universality
and this is one of the more than more
than the
the books the beginning of infinity and
the fabric of reality
i think among physicists uh one of the
the reasons why
david deutsch is well known in the
community is because of this i think
that the paper was in
1985 where he published what i would
regard as the
essentially the foundations of quantum
computation
now there is some debate here just as
there is in classical computation you
know
who ultimately in some sense deserves
the credit for
for this theory you know in in classical
computation we go is it alonzo church
was it alan turing
most people sort of uh hedged towards
alan turing because he had the turing
machine which is this
way in which we can have a programmable
machine that can do the work of any
other
machine or any other computer can
compute what any other computer can
compute
and david deutsch came along well he
applied the laws of quantum theory
to turing's machine to the idea of a
turing machine of a classical computer
now
there is some suggestion that richard
feynman had had also written some things
that are related to this but i think
most of us sort of think well if we're
going to draw a line towards the person
from which the industry of quantum
computation sprung out
it really did seem to be that paper and
in that paper
what david is saying is that the laws of
physics
are themselves computable and anything
that is made of physical stuff
in our universe namely everything
obeys these laws of physics which a
computer
could be programmed to simulate so it
doesn't matter what the system is
it can be simulated by simulated
efficiently by
at least a quantum computer in some
cases a classical computer as well
but the quantum computer allows you to
do a whole bunch of things efficiently
not every single kind of
mathematical problem that you can feed
into a quantum computer can the quantum
computer actually do efficiently there
are things that can
outstrip even the powers of quantum
computer but certainly for the physical
stuff within
a universe we can use quantum computers
to simulate them so what does this have
to do with people well it says
that brains the brains of people are
just physical systems
obeying quantum physical laws and so in
theory you could
do a simulation of a human brain you
don't even need quantum computation for
this by the way
you only need turing's universal
idea of a classical computer most of us
think that whatever the brain
is doing is a form of classical
computation
so that's the sense in which the
universality of computation has
some connection to the nature of what it
means to be a
human being because the human being is
a mind running on a brain and the brain
is a physical system
now the additional step on top of this
because after all
my cat that's wandering around making
noises on making this podcast
is also a physical system and a
classical computer could simulate the
mind of that cat
but different to the cat what a human
has
on top of its brain is a kind of
universal software that the cat does not
have
and when we talk about this universal
software so i'm not talking about the
brain the hardware anymore
the hardware could be universal in the
same way that a classical computer is
universal
you don't need much for a universal
classical computer a
a a washing machine these days contains
a classical computer that is universal
that in theory could do the work of
any other computer it just probably take
a lot longer to do the work of another
computer it might need a little bit of
additional memory as well to do
the work of another computer but when we
talk that's the hardware stuff but when
we talk about
the software that's running on the brain
of the cat well it can only do cat stuff
the cat isn't able to add numbers
together the cat isn't able to
compose a sonnet the cat isn't able to
think of calculus
it's not able to model the rest of
physical reality
at best my cat probably has a physical
model in the brain of
the house that's about it it can find
its way around the house it can find its
way to food
but a person a human being has this
capacity
to model to explain every other physical
system that exists that we know of in
physical reality
which is an astonishing fact about human
beings
david uses the example of a quasa an
object
on the other side of the universe whose
physics is completely unlike the physics
of the human brain and yet
there is something similar between the
quasar and the person's brain namely
inside a person's brain inside their
mind
is a working model not just a visual
image but a mathematical model
with mathematical relationships between
the parts of the explanation of the
quasar
that is in one-to-one correspondence
with what's going on in that quasar
billions of light years away which is
just remarkable and that's a quasar but
you can apply that to
any physical system and this puts paid
to this idea
that many people have had over the years
many scientists uh
let's let's pick on uh the great
professor dawkins
is wonderful professor dawkins who has
gifted us with such great knowledge
about
how biology works and the selfish gene
and you know we cannot detract from what
richard dawkins
has contributed to our body of knowledge
however richard dawkins
has expressed ideas that many many
scientists have expressed over the years
and his ideas of
middle world and middle world is that
our brains have evolved
only to comprehend what's going on in
middle worlds so we can't possibly
understand what's really going on with
quantum theory it's too small we didn't
evolve that
we can't really understand what's going
on with general relativity where things
are too big or too fast or too massive
and so on
and so our brains are somehow limited in
their capacity to understand these
things but that's wrong that's wrong
because of
this explanatory universality that
people have
we can understand these things because
we're able to understand anything that
can be understood
i think neil degrasse tyson was another
one who said maybe the ultimate laws of
physics
are simply too difficult for us to
understand or maybe if an alien
came to us then they would have the
ultimate laws of physics but they'd be
unable to explain it to us because we
are just like chimpanzees compared to
them
my own father likes to talk in this way
that you know maybe we like cockroaches
or chickens compared to the super
intelligent aliens
that are out there but i think this
simply cannot be the case that
for any explanation all it is is just a
sequence of statements one logically
following from the previous one coming
together to describe
model explain some physical phenomena
and if you don't understand one of those
inferences one of those lines and that
explanation you can ask for an
explanation of how you get from that
line to the next line
there must always be a way of explaining
to someone else
how the explanation works it must be
computable
for reasons of computational
universality and so therefore
there must be a way in which you can
express this
in natural language such that a person
who is sufficiently interested
and is going to pay attention will be
able to understand that and if the super
intelligent aliens come along
with the successor to the successor to
the successor of quantum theory
they'll be able to explain to us it
might take a while but we'll be able to
get there we will be able to
explain precisely what they can explain
because
that's the nature of universality it
means that
whatever can be understood can be
understood by us
i have a few follow-up questions to that
i want to
allow myself to think out loud on this
topic a little bit here
and yeah please interrupt me if anything
i
say happen to be false but this is the
way
i've come to understand this after what
you said there
computational universality is a proven
fact of the laws of physics as we know
them today
that's what david did in his paper which
is
essentially saying that since the laws
of physics themselves are computable
then everything that has to follow those
which is every
other physical process has to be
computable as well
this implies directly that our minds our
brains
have to be computable and hence they can
be simulated
by a computer am i right so far fallibly
perfect
yeah thank you that's a great yeah
that's
that's a cool phrase can we just i think
this this sort of takes us just a little
uh sort of a little segue but i just
like to flag this for people
when chris says a proven fact now what
we understand
that to mean within this fallibleist
worldview is not that it is the once and
for all final truth
proven in david deutsch's conception he
has this wonderful chapter in the fabric
of reality and various other places
where he talks about what proven
actually means proven just means also
it's a kind of computation
and it can contain errors but proven
fact is a a perfectly reasonable thing
to say about everything that chris said
there
right now that that's important and yes
it's it's all provisionally true
when we talk about that but as you have
mentioned recently in your podcast it's
just cumbersome to always preface when
you say something is true with
provisionally true i mean that should be
implied with the right epistemology so
yeah that's great and okay so so that
that's one part of it
so if i come in with the objection oh
but the brain being a computer
is just a analogy
why doesn't that hold up because as you
rightly said
it's provably the fact that
mata follows the laws of physics the
laws of physics are computable
the brain is made of matter it is doing
computations that's what it's doing all
you need to do is to add in your mind
22 plus 23 you're doing a computation
there's no way of getting away
from this notion of physical processes
being
computations of a kind and the brain
actually doing those computations
why people want to deny that the brain
is a computer
i don't know they want i think they want
to preserve some sort of
supernatural spiritual idea magical
thinking
that if we if we just regard the brain
as a physical
object then therefore we lose something
about
human nature but i think we gain a whole
lot we still have
we must say there is still a lot of
mystery here but it's an interesting
scientific mystery
it is what is the nature of the software
that's running on the brain we don't
have to jump
to magical explanations we can jump to
our best
scientific explanation which is the
brain is a computer of some sort and i
know that people there are various
people out there great thinkers on this
original thinkers on this
who want to go down the road of
conceiving of the brain as being some
other kind of
object that's not a computer and it
being an analogy after all all the other
analogies
failed that you thought that the brain
was some kind of sort of steam engine
type thing and that will
like a steam engine type thing that was
just an analogy and we know that that's
wrong now
but although you know i completely
support the idea that people should try
out different ideas of course we can't
we can't preclude any ideas everything
should be on the table but at the same
time we can't ignore
what we know what we know from our best
science
is physical systems obey physical laws
the brain as a physical system obeying
physical laws
and that physical system is completing
computations
and i would go further and say it's
running certain kind of software
yeah and that's going to be my next line
of inquiry here but so so to
stay on that point just a little bit
what is it that makes
us say that the the brain is a computer
but
uh rock was also a physical process it's
not
a computer is it that it doesn't perform
any computations but it is a
computational process or what
how do you differentiate yeah precisely
so there's no
there's no input output is there for the
rock there now there is for a computer
right the cat the cat's got input coming
into its sensors and it's
undergoing behaviors it's got a certain
kind of output so it's a computer it's
brain is a computer as well
but as i say it's not a it doesn't have
this universal capacity to do anything
it likes it can't universally construct
anything it likes
but we we are taking input we're taking
you know evidence from our senses
and then we're doing stuff we've got an
output so
how how we're getting from input to
output well there's got to be a
processor there's some sort of process
going on and another word for that
process is
a computation a computer is the thing
doing undergoing that process taking the
interesting software inputs and making
certain hardware outputs like walking as
we
walk along and we build this this visual
model of
the world around us so because
computation is universal
there can only be one type of
information processing in this universe
which means that any system that is
effectively
taking an output and providing an output
did i say that right taking in an input
and providing an output is effectively a
sort of
computer in this fundamental sense not
in the laptop sense
if you look at the higher emergent level
but basically
anything that processing information
that way is is a sort of computer not
universal
but does that make sense yes you there
has to be
a computation going on behind the scenes
somewhere you know you look at traffic
lights changing from
red to green or whatever the fact that
they're changing over time
in response usually to whether the pres
there's a car there or not a car
you know these ones that are actually
able to detect things there must be a
computer behind that now there are
certain regularities that happen in
nature where you wouldn't say
well that's a computer you know as
planets orbit the sun i wouldn't
describe that system of the planets
going around the sun even though there's
motion
i wouldn't say that that's a computation
as such they're obeying physical laws
and those physical laws are computable
and what you could simulate that inside
of the computer but that thing that
system itself is not a computer
however how about a plant well
no i think a plant is going to be
something like that planetary system i
would say
it's not a computer because although you
have
a a kind of energy coming down so in the
sense that's kind of um
an input the sunlight is coming down and
the rain is coming down
is being absorbed and you're kind of
outputting you know this is this is when
it becomes an analogy or outputting
growth of the plant i wouldn't say that
that is a computation as such because
other than the at the cellular level
there's no nervous system there's no
brain there there's nothing there that
is actually forming a model
of the rest of reality in any kind of
sense in the case of the traffic lights
it's forming a very very low resolution
simple
model of reality because it can detect
presence of cars or not presence of cars
let's say so there must be some kind of
computer there that is uh
doing something at least so could you
invoke
self-similarity here i'm not absolutely
sure
that i well we can never be i got myself
there
but i'm not sure i understand
self-similarity perfectly
to me it just means that there are parts
of the universe that can be represented
by other parts such as our brains for
instance
would you say that's correct to begin
with i guess so yes so
yeah in the case of that as we say the
you know the case of the brain it's
forming these models of the the rest of
physical reality as much as it knows of
that physical reality i
yeah i personally don't understand uh
self-similarity does it include for
example
um a painting that someone does of a
landscape you know the the painting has
similarity of the rest of the landscape
but uh i guess that self-similarity is
inside the brain of the artist
self-similarity is just that the reality
is representable
by a universal computer right that's how
i think about it and then
a computer then from what you've said
here could be something that can
instantiate abstractions and their
properties
even in a in a minor way and i i guess
the plant wouldn't do that but the
traffic light would
would that be fair yeah correct yes yes
yes so in principle
the computer can contain within it some
model
of the rest of reality or at least a
part of reality as i keep going back to
the cat you know it can it can have a
model of part of reality and the traffic
lights are part of reality
presence or absence of traffic on the
road
now that's very useful for me in my own
thinking here selfishly but
okay so if i come in with the other
objection then yeah i will grant you
brett that
after all you said there it follows that
the brain must be a computer sure
but how do i know that the computer is
true and complete
that is that it can effectively compute
everything
that is computable how do i know that
so for turing completeness all we need
for a universal turing computer
the theory of the turing computer is an
ability to
write a symbol delete a symbol move the
read head
hither or this in order to continue the
computation
it's it's not much to ask and so in the
case of almost any computer that exists
it's going to be turing complete now
there are certain
ways in which you can artificially
restrict the ability of computers to do
certain tasks
there might be good reasons why a
programmer would want to do that in
which case you make the
programming language such that the
computer is not
turing complete but in the case of our
brains there is no such limitation
that's been imposed by
some sort of programmer and hit the two
by the way you know even if someone
thinks that this is the case that
although the brain
isn't turing complete they have some ad
hoc reason why you know the
the neil degrasse tyson argument that
the ultimate laws of physics might be
such that our brains simply can't
understand them
i suppose that's an argument for just
maybe our brains aren't turing complete
well we can just take the
optimistic view that hitherto our
explanation for
why it is we've been able to come up
with these grand explanations of reality
is because we have a cheering complete
full ability to understand anything that
is
comprehensible we can compute anything
that is computable
why we think that should fail in the
future i don't know their explanation of
why it's worked so far is
the brain is turing complete we are
universal explainers
i don't think that
computational universality even if you
grant that the human brain
is computationally universal to
incomplete
that doesn't say anything about whether
we
does in fact have the explanatory
universality those two doesn't
imply each other uh logically right
so universal um explanatory universality
it could be the case that although
computationally universal there are
still limits to what we can explain
because of our software
that wouldn't be universal but i think
that
the arguments as far as i understand
them and i i kind of uh
wrote a thesis against super
intelligence for my cognitive science
bachelors
and we argued that well first of all we
can explain
some parts of reality accordingly it
would be very strange to say that
yes some parts of reality we can explain
some parts we can explain what
why would that be the case we don't have
an explanation for that also
we have a very very fine understanding
of the laws of physics
that seem to be computable as you said
and so if we can understand those we
should be able to understand
everything else that follows those laws
right that makes sense to me
and then thirdly it's just kind of
aching to
supernatural explanations to say that
some things can affect us
but there's no way to explain how that's
going on
so uh would you agree with those three
and is there anything you would add to
that
no absolutely and i think that um david
deutsch himself on your very podcast it
made made those points that there are
these
these two kinds of universality the
first of which being this hardware
universality kind
whether things are able to compute
anything that can be computed
and then the explanatory universality on
top of that there which is the software
kind
that we're running the one doesn't
necessarily follow
from the other and i think that this
desire
from some intellectuals to deny
the capacity of the human the capacity
of the person
to comprehend reality it's just all part
of that same misconception that people
are
either impotent or evil kind of thing
you know that either we're
we're just not able to do much at all to
affect
physical reality and to affect our
condition and insofar as we can we're
just evil anyway so i just think it's
part of that
that view that terrible ideology that
that can
color the way in which people think
about all this stuff and so
in in that world view it's good to say
on that world view that hey people just
can't understand everything anyway and
maybe everything that
that we think is just completely and
utterly flawed now of course we as
fallible as we will say yeah
we agree that uh there can be errors in
any part of our knowledge and we expect
there to be areas in every any part of
our knowledge but we also expect that to
be truth
we expect there to be solutions to the
problems that we have real solutions to
the problems that we have
and we see no reason why and no reason
to argue for
the impotence of people or the um the
lack of capacity of people the
imprintable
ability of people to continue to make
progress to continue to understand
the deepest most fundamental physical
laws we fully expect that to happen and
if people want to argue that people of
the future
will just cease to make progress we'll
we'll stop understanding things or there
will be things that are too hard to
understand that's fine let them argue so
long as they're not getting in the way
of the people doing the work of actually
trying to understand
stuff i'm happy for them to go off and
have a little club over there
you know the the pessimists of the world
and they can all sit there and they can
they can pray for the end times because
they think the end times are coming and
you know there's nothing we can do about
it let them have their little religion
over there
we'll continue to make scientific and
philosophical and moral progress
yeah i mean i mean to play devil's
advocate a bit i guess you could
say that well we want to keep our
humility
in the sense that we've seen
historically how segregating
different people have become a real
moral issue and
led to horrendous things like the
holocaust and things like that
and uh i guess it might be a good
intention behind that not wanting to
create something like that again i don't
think that's an argument for
uh denying computational universality
but i think you we can take with us the
idea that we we should be
humble but we shouldn't be timid little
[__] right
do you know what i mean so that makes
sense but it's not they're mistaken on
the fact that therefore we should
denigrate ourselves which would be as i
also said to david in our podcast that
i can't think of anything more racist
than actually saying the entire humanity
is
worthless or uh a virus or like
that's even more racist than just
singling out one one uh
yeah precisely i don't want to um
socially control anyone or mentally
control anyone so
there will be people who argue for not
wanting to make progress or because they
think that humans are a danger or
whatever i'm happy for them to
not make progress they don't have to
make progress they can have stasis in a
little community that is static
so long as they're not trying to control
the rest of us who want to make progress
now
i don't think there needs to be one
person needs to compel the other now of
course they might very well say and some
of them of course do argue i was
i was laughing about this myself
recently about
well let's just name nick bostrom who
argues about
all the ways in which uh the world might
end or the existential threats that are
out there
and you know he will talk about of
course the asteroid might come and
destroy the earth
the the ag the the super intelligent ai
might take over the earth as well
when you read his serious philosophical
papers on this often his
prescriptions for the way in which we
can avoid these catastrophes is to have
you know global government that is going
to just control everyone and tax
everyone and ensure we have sufficient
resources
and sufficient control over everyone so
that these terrible things don't happen
but in his list of things that that
might destroy the world one of them is
a totalitarian regime so he's got
there's this weird irony at the center
of his entire philosophy
and the center of the the pessimistic
philosophy that the very thing
that might kill us can only be solved by
another thing that might kill us so uh
yeah
we need to be able to identify flaws in
reasoning like that
and identify different avenues for
progress
namely that of course we're always going
to have these problems but we are the
solution
to these problems there is no
alternative there's no alternative other
than
continually making progress and ever
faster progress
not only for the problems we do know
about but as david
is very animated in trying to remind us
the problems that we don't yet know
about the problems that are unforeseen
and the only solution to
being able to solve problems not yet
foreseen is to make progress as rapidly
as possible to create more and more
fundamental knowledge because the deeper
and more fundamental your knowledge
then the broader the uh sort of spectrum
of problems that you'll be able to solve
into the infinite future
yeah and i guess that might be the
second misconception
underlying the idea that underlying the
fact that people seem to
want us not to be able to explain
everything there's some romanticism
there almost with
what we said uh yeah invoking some
there's something nice about having uh
well supposedly nice about having
something out of our reach
something that is untouchable
unexplainable and
i i just think you can believe we can
explain anything and in that sense we
are
gods to some agree to some degree and
still have that humility
and excitement about the fact that we
know epistemologically that we will
never
reach the end anyway there will always
be problems but the problems can become
more and more interesting at infinitum
and to me it's just yeah it's such a
mind-expanding thing to realize that
yeah we can explain whatever we want to
explain
and that's amazing but we're never gonna
run out of interesting things to explain
so i mean
i don't see yeah i just think it's a
mistake to
hold on to that view yeah i think that
like as you as you say like um
it's sort of a humbling thing and we can
be
modest in the face of the fact that we
will never explain everything
but i don't know if necessarily modesty
is the right
term to label this it's simply a fact of
reality that we can't possibly explain
everything into the future because
of the other fact problems are
inevitable so that we're always going to
end up with being encounter
encountering something for which
hitherto we don't have an explanation
and isn't that fun isn't that like the
best thing about
our circumstances that we're not going
to get to the final answer
people who talk about the end of science
who talk about a completed science a
completed science of the mind or
completed physics or completed this or
that
what they're talking about is a point at
which
human civilization has the final answer
and if you have the final answer well
that evokes all sorts of nasty ideas
isn't it
this idea that beyond which we can do no
more beyond which we can solve
solve no more problems and beyond which
we cannot improve our lot
we get to a point where it is kind of a
utopia
and you hope you're in the bad sense you
know the the utopia was supposed to be a
bad idea you know the original thinkers
on this
you know have had the idea that utopia
isn't something you want to strive for
it's something you want to avoid and so
if you have this idea of
completed right it's a dystopia yeah
yeah and so you get to this point where
whatever the situation is at that time
there's no way of improving things
and so therefore any problem that you
encounter
is not possibly going to be solved but
you know problems are soluble they're
inevitable but they're soluble
hell yeah man that's great uh okay so
and and uh to tie the knot on the whole
computational universality of people
we don't have an alternative explanation
good explanation to
turing's computational theory a person
can come in and say yeah well
that's a theory but it might not be true
because that
is effectively the only good explanation
we have
as of now right as far as i know i mean
i've heard the only other
thinker i've heard on this that has
given me some degree of pause
was donald hoffman on sam harris's
podcast
but his so far as i can tell his his
thesis his metaphysical thesis i would
call it
doesn't make any testable predictions
but what he says
is that the most fundamental thing in
the universe is consciousness
and that it's kind of like this
operating system
that exists somewhere it's not
necessarily running on the brain
perhaps it is i'm not sure i really
fully understood the idea
but he just went the full hog so to
speak and just
denied computational universality he
didn't really address it
but he was just willing to say well
there's something deeper than the laws
of physics that something deeper is
consciousness and
out of this consciousness out of this
so-called theory of consciousness that
he has
arises fundamental physics now
it gave me pause but not for long i i
kind of had a
i wrote a blog couple of blog posts on
this and i have a bunch of criticisms
about that
that whole way of conceiving of reality
and i don't think
ultimately it doesn't seem to make any
testable predictions which is what we
want from a scientific theory want a way
of
distinguishing that theory from other
theories
yeah because i i remember listening to
the uh first episode on the
then waking up podcast with sam harris
between david
and sam and i know that they were
talking about
functionalism information processing the
idea of a
why we're smarter than a chicken why did
it doesn't make sense to say that other
aliens
would stand in the same relation to us
and uh
i know that sam kind of conceded the
point in the end but he said
with some proviso like i i don't
remember verbatim but he said
something like this assumes that
computational universality is true like
that that theory is true and he
seemed to put it on the shelf as a not
as a proven fact
of the best laws of physics as far as we
know them today but rather as say oh
it's an option but there are other
options that are equally viable
it is a law of physics it is a law of
physics in as good standing as anything
in general relativity it's
it's it's a fundamental scientific
principle you know as good standing as
something like
evolution by natural selection or
neo-darwinism um
of course assuming that's true yes yes
sam or anyone else who
is is thinking along you know we say
black holes exist assuming that general
relativity is correct you know um
stars exist assuming that our theories
of astrophysics are correct and in fact
you know we're not bounded by a
celestial sphere at some point
always our knowledge is assuming that
the best that we know at the moment
is in fact the best that we know at the
moment it's not to say that it's finally
true
or that it can't possibly be tweaked or
turned over
at some point but what else can we say
what what other than
just doing this metaphysical kind of
artistry
you know where we're just talking about
harry potter type universes although
that's a technical term we shouldn't
mention that but talking about fantasy
universes
where the laws of physics are different
which is always fun to have after you've
had a couple of beers
but if we want to talk about a serious
conception
of the best that we know about physical
reality
here now according to our best
scientific and philosophical
understandings and we have to
we have to assume that these things are
true uh if we want to play the game of
what alternative laws of physics might
lead to what alternative laws of physics
might
cause uh the nature of humans to be
or the the nature of the universe to be
then we could play that game but
we're no longer doing science yeah no
and that's i guess
what my point was supposed to be that i
i don't think
i think it's a misconception there that
it's
more humble in a good way to not take
our best explanations
very seriously i don't think we're doing
anyone a service
by saying then that well uh universality
computation
might be true but let's not get too
hasty on accepting it
like no no we need to accept it now
because we don't have a better
theory that solves all those problems
that it solves and so let's
not stick around argue that point let's
let's keep moving forward
until we get problems with that theory
and then try to solve them
but i think that's a mistake that many
intellectuals make about
being overly humble there or thinking
that that type of skepticism
is actually a good thing i also want to
tie that back
to something we said in the beginning
when we were
kind of defending a ferocious interest
in the world view that david deutsch has
laid out for us in his books
his theory of everything if i may call
it that is not
the answer to any of our future problems
and it doesn't solve uh any future
mysteries that we want to solve it's
it's essentially critical it imposes
restraints on what future good theories
can and can't be
and that's the main role of that whole
framework and so i mean it's it's not
that
yeah we're i i think that's often a
misconception though yeah we have the
the final answer here no no this is just
a restraint on future theories and now
we got to get working on those future
theories
but let's not waste more time
comparing creationism to evolution by
natural selection and saying oh which
one is true
and it's the same one same thing here
with computational universality let's
just
bring that with us just as we do with
quantum theory
and and keep solving problems keep being
critical keep criticizing all of these
but also really taking the best
explanations we have
seriously without unnecessary uh
humility
that is is and skepticism that is just
misplaced
yeah that's one of the i think most
subtle difficult
changes in perspective if you come to
this popular way of understanding
knowledge
and david has emphasized this in certain
places and it is
a kind of shocking when you accept it
and
what i'm talking about here is that all
the theories
are critical in the sense that they are
criticisms of
every other competitor to them and
sometimes there is no other competitor
but they should be seen as
criticism so something like quantum
theory the scientific theory of quantum
theory
is a criticism of every other
competing claim
you